# Push vs Pull

Every summer on a large fairground in St. Paul, the Minnesota State Fair is held, and well over a million Minnesotans attend. There are many food vendors scattered all around the fairgrounds. One of the most popular vendors is a large grilled-corn stand. Some other popular vendors have very long lines—for example, it’s not unusual to have to wait behind two dozen people to buy deep fried olives on a stick.4 But the grilled-corn stand is able to serve many people, usually with a very short wait and almost no lines. How do they do it?

Unlike the deep-fried olive vendor, which has two identical windows that often both have very long lines, the grilled-corn vendor has two separate stations set up. At the first station, you hand over your money and you’re given a ticket. You then take the ticket over to the second station, where you hand it to a person and are given your grilled corn on a cob.

For first-time state fair attendees, this seems a bit superfluous: why did I just give my money to someone, take a ticket, and then immediately hand that ticket to someone else? But now you should recognize this extra step: the ticket is a kanban, and the grilled-corn vendor uses it to create a WIP limit and establish a pull system.

The people making the grilled corn at the second station know how many tickets are out at a time, and will only pass enough tickets to the first station so that there isn’t a large line of ticket holders waiting for grilled corn. This lets them adjust the amount of corn that they keep on the grill so that during slower periods they don’t keep corn on the grill so long that it turns into charcoal, and during peak periods they can keep a lot of corn on the grills to minimize lines. It also means that they can hire extra people to do the grilling, so that there are more people doing the time-consuming task of grilling without having to pause and take money. In the rare cases when the number of people who want corn is greater than the amount that’s ready to serve, the line only forms at the first station. The grillers are protected from the chaos of many people standing in line and trying to hand them money, which allows them to con‐ centrate on grilling and causes the line to move faster and disappear more quickly. And because their work is flowing smoothly, the grillers can get into a rhythm, which causes them to feel more comfortable—and also do a good job.

Adjusting the WIP limit helps the grilled-corn vendor deal with variability. By increasing the number of tickets available and putting more corn on the grill during peak periods (like after a big show lets out at the nearby grandstand), they can ramp up production smoothly and quickly, and then reduce it just as smoothly after the peak disappears. And whether or not the corn vendors know it, they’re taking advan‐ tage of Little’s Law: by limiting the number of people arriving into the system, they can reduce the lead time for people who have handed over their money and are now waiting for their corn.

This example helps illustrate the difference between a push system and a pull system. The deep-fried olive stand uses a push system: a long line of people. The people are “pushing” because they’re creating the demand as they line up. The vendors selling the olives don’t have any control over that demand; they can only sell olives to the next person in line. At the corn vendor, the people at the grill station are “pulling” because they give tickets to the station that takes the money. They use those tickets to pull people to the grill station, and can limit the number of people they pull by limit‐ ing the number of tickets. This is how they set a WIP limit, which lets them match the number of tickets available to the amount of corn on the grill. Adjusting the WIP limit lets them adjust to variability on the fly.
